Lookups doc updates (WIP) (#16725)
apache/druid: docs/querying/lookups-cached-global.md

  ~ under the License.
  -->

> Globally cached lookups all draw from the same cache pool, allowing each Druid process to have a fixed cache pool that can be used by cached lookups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Globally cached lookups all draw from the same cache pool, allowing each Druid service to have a fixed cache pool that can be used by cached lookups.
```
we're opting for service over process now.

To use this Apache Druid extension, [include](../configuration/extensions.md#loading-extensions) `druid-lookups-cached-global` in the extensions load list.

## Configuration

> Globally cached lookups are appropriate for lookups which are not possible to pass at query time due to their size,
> or are not desired to be passed at query time because the data is to reside in and be handled by the Druid servers,
> and are small enough to reasonably populate in-memory. This usually means tens to tens of thousands of entries per lookup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use globally cached lookup in the following scenarios:
- The lookup is too large to pass at query time.
- You want the lookup data to reside in a Druid data source handled by Druid and the lookup is small enough to reasonably reside in memory--between tens and tens of thousand of entries per lookup.
```

:::info
 Druid no longer supports static lookup configuration. You can configure lookups through
 [dynamic configuration](./lookups.md#configuration).

> :::

Reviewer: how long has this been out of support? Can we just not mention now?

Author: yes, updated

}
```

## Cache settings

Lookups are cached locally on Historical processes. The following are settings used by the processes which service queries when
setting namespaces (Broker, Peon, Historical)

|Property|Description|Default|
|--------|-----------|-------|
|`druid.lookup.namespace.cache.type`|Specifies the type of caching for the namespaces to use. May be one of [`offHeap`, `onHeap`]. `offHeap` uses a temporary file for off-heap storage of the namespace (memory mapped files). `onHeap` stores all cache on the heap in standard java map types.|`onHeap`|

> |`druid.lookup.namespace.numExtractionThreads`|The number of threads in the thread pool dedicated for lookup extraction and updates. You may need to increase this number if you have a lot of lookups and they take long time to extract, to avoid timeouts.|2|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`druid.lookup.namespace.numExtractionThreads`|The number of threads in the thread pool dedicated for lookup extraction and updates. If you have a lot of lookups and they take long time to extract, increase this number to avoid timeouts.|2|
```

|`druid.lookup.namespace.numBufferedEntries`|If using off-heap caching, the number of records to store on an on-heap buffer.|100,000|

> Druid populates the cache in different ways depending on the settings below. In general, most namespaces employ

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Druid populates the cache in different ways depending on the following settings. In general, most namespaces employ
```

a `pollPeriod` at the end of which they poll the remote resource of interest for updates.

> `onHeap` uses `ConcurrentMap`s in the java heap, and therefore affects garbage collection and heap sizing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`onHeap` uses `ConcurrentMap`s in the java heap which affects garbage collection and heap sizing.
```

`offHeap` uses an on-heap buffer and MapDB using memory-mapped files in the java temporary directory.

> Therefore, if the total number of entries in the `cachedNamespace` exceeds the buffer's configured capacity, the extra entries are kept in memory as page cache, and paged in and out by general OS tunings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, if the total number of entries in the `cachedNamespace` exceeds the buffer's configured capacity, Druid maintains the extra entries in memory as page cache, and paged in and out according to general operating system tunings.
```

We strongly recommended that you set `druid.lookup.namespace.numBufferedEntries` when using `offHeap`. Select a value between 10% and 50% of the number of entries in the lookup.

## Supported lookups

> For information on additional lookups, please see the [extensions list](../configuration/extensions.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For information on additional lookups, refer to the [extensions list](../configuration/extensions.md).
```

|Property|Description|Required|Default|
|--------|-----------|--------|-------|
|`pollPeriod`|Time period between polling for updates, in ms.|No|0 (only once)|
|`uri`|URI for the lookup file. Can be a file, HDFS, S3 or GCS path.|You must define either `uri` or `uriPrefix`.*|None|
|`uriPrefix`|A URI prefix that specifies a directory or other searchable resource where lookup files are located.|You must define either `uri` or `uriPrefix`.*|None|
|`fileRegex`|Optional regex for matching the file name under `uriPrefix`. Only used if `uriPrefix` is defined.|No|`".*"`|
|`namespaceParseSpec`|How to interpret the data at the URI.|Yes||
|`maxHeapPercentage`|The maximum percentage of heap size for the lookup to consume. If the lookup grows beyond this size, Druid logs warning messages in the respective service logs.|No|10% of JVM heap size|

*Define `uri` or `uriPrefix` as either a local file system (`file://`), HDFS (`hdfs://`), S3 (`s3://`) or GCS (`gs://`) location. Druid doesn't support HTTP location.

> The `pollPeriod` value specifies the period in ISO 8601 format between checks for replacement data for the lookup. If the source of the lookup is capable of providing a timestamp, the lookup is only updated if it has changed since the prior tick of `pollPeriod`. A value of 0, an absent parameter, or `null` all direct Druid to populate the lookup once and not attempt to look for new data later. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pollPeriod` value specifies the period in ISO 8601 format between checks for replacement data for the lookup. If the source of the lookup provides a timestamp, Druid only updates the lookup when the lookup has changed since the prior `pollPeriod` timestamp. A value of 0, an absent parameter, or `null` all direct Druid to populate the lookup once without attempting to check again for new data. 
```

> Whenever a poll occurs, the updating system looks for a file with the most recent timestamp and assumes that is the one with the most recent data set, using it to replace the local cache of the lookup data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Druid polls the lookup source, the updating system treats the file with the most recent timestamp as the one with the most recent data set and replace the local cache of the lookup data with the file contents.
```

}
```

With `customJson` parsing, if the value field for a particular row is missing or null Druid skips that line and doesn't include it in the lookup.

#### simpleJson lookupParseSpec

> The `simpleJson` `lookupParseSpec` doesn't take any parameters. It's simply a line-delimited JSON file where the field is the key, and the field's value is the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `simpleJson` `lookupParseSpec` doesn't take any parameters. It's simply a newline-delimited JSON file where the field is the key, and the field's value is the value.
```

### JDBC lookup

> The JDBC lookups polls a database to populate its local cache. If the `tsColumn` is defined it must be able to accept comparisons in the format `'2015-01-01 00:00:00'`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JDBC lookups polls a database to populate the local cache. If the `tsColumn` is defined it must be able to accept comparisons in the format `'2015-01-01 00:00:00'`. 
```
